# Airline-Routing

Airline and crew scheduling is a core problem for all airline companies as it has a significant impact on their profit, which they want to maximize. This is done by planning flights and crews so that the number of flights taken and the number of crews is optimized. This report discusses how this industry problem can be tackled with the use of a simplified crew pairing problem

A very popular problem that is studied often by airliners is crew pairing. Airline companies want to know how to optimally assign crews to flights that are already predetermined to minimize total cost. This is an important problem to solve to optimize the number of flights that can be taken by a single crew. This will allow companies to be more efficient in scheduling their crews and flight sequences. This will ultimately help them save money.

The objective is to solve a crew pairing problem. The goal of a crew pairing problem is to form sequences of flights that are assigned to the same crew. This is done by pairing flights together and assigning it to a crew. In this context, a pairing is defined as the sequence of viable flights. Furthermore, the concept of the pairing is assigning a crew to the sequence of viable flights. Thus, the objective of the crew scheduling problem is to minimize the time-related costs associated with pairing sequence of flights to crews 

Breadth first search algorithm was used to find all possible pairings from the adjacency matrix. The possible pairings will be further used with the heuristics to find an optimal solution. To develop a more realistic/complex model for airline routing and crew scheduling, the team decided to use a construction heuristic. A construction heuristic is  an algorithm that determines a tour based on construction rules. However, this heuristic does not try to improve upon this tour. The construction heuristic was used to pick the most feasible pairings based on the constraints. First, the upper triangular adjacency matrix was converted to an upper triangular cost matrix. Wherever there is a ‘1’ in the matrix (1 indicates that it is a possible flight), there will be a random cost assigned to that flight.  The algorithm takes in the adjacency cost matrix and outputs all possible pairings. All the pairings that are outputted has a total cost associated with it. The algorithm first picks a pairing with the cheapest cost and it then picks the next cheapest cost and compares it against all previous chosen paths. The goal is to have selected the most cheapest pairing but with no overlaps because one of the constraints was that a flight can be covered in a pairing once. If a chosen pairing had no overlap, it will be added to the list of all feasible pairings. If a chosen pairing had an overlap, it will be ignored and will not be considered again. Due to the overlaps, the constraint of choosing all flights had to be relaxed. For example, if a particular pairing was chosen, it will be checked against all other selected feasible paths. The chosen pairing will be dropped if a particular flight exists in one of the selected feasible pairings. The pairings that were dropped might contain flights that were not accounted for. Thus, not all flights will be covered in the feasible pairings chosen.  Finally, once all feasible and possible pairings have been found, crews will be assigned to the chosen pairings. Based on however many pairings are chosen, a crew will be assigned to each pairing. 
